README.md, before:

# Intelligent Inference Router

This project provides a prototype OpenAI-compatible API gateway. Requests may be
forwarded to local agents, proxied to external providers such as OpenAI, or
resolved using the built-in SQLite model registry.

## Development

Start the router using `make dev` and access `http://localhost:8000/v1/chat/completions`.

Before running any `make` command, activate the local virtual environment:

```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
```

For local models, run the Local Agent service:

```bash
uvicorn local_agent.main:app --port 5000
# or
python -m local_agent.main
```

See [docs/local_agent.md](docs/local_agent.md) for configuration options and environment variables.

Any request whose `model` starts with `local` will be forwarded to this agent.

### Docker

The development stack is defined in `docker-compose.yml` and includes the
router service and a Redis instance. The SQLite model registry is stored in a
named volume so data persists between runs.

Start the stack with:

```bash
make docker-dev
```

Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust the values if needed.
Key environment variables:

- `RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS` – maximum requests per client within the window
- `RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW` – window size in seconds for rate limiting
- `GROK_BASE_URL` – base URL for the Grok API
- `EXTERNAL_GROK_KEY` – API key for Grok

On macOS you may also run the Local Agent container by enabling the `darwin`
profile:

```bash
COMPOSE_PROFILES=darwin make docker-dev
```

Press `Ctrl+C` to stop the services; the `docker-dev` target will automatically
remove the containers. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust the values if
needed.


### k3s Cluster

To spin up a local k3s cluster with the sample llm-d chart run:

```bash
make k3s-up
```

After the chart deploys, set `LLMD_ENDPOINT` to the service URL so the router
can forward requests.

Run the unit tests with:

```bash
make test
```

Integration tests require Docker and are skipped by default. Execute them
explicitly with:

```bash
make test-integration
```

### Model Registry

Create the SQLite registry and seed default entries:

```bash
make migrate
make seed
```

Add or update a single model entry:

```bash
python -m router.cli add-model <name> <type> <endpoint> [kind]
```

Register a Hugging Face model that uses local weights:

```bash
python -m router.cli add-model meta-llama/Llama-3 huggingface https://huggingface.co weight
```

Fetch the latest models from OpenAI and refresh the registry:

```bash
python -m router.cli refresh-openai
```

## Documentation

This project uses [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) with the
[Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) theme.
Key pages include `setup.md`, `usage.md` and `api_examples.md` under `docs/`.
Start a live preview with:

```bash
make docs-serve
```

CI builds the site using `mkdocs build` and a dedicated workflow deploys the
generated `site/` directory to GitHub Pages.

Commit message:

docs: update caching info for in-memory

README.md, after:

# Intelligent Inference Router

This project provides a prototype OpenAI-compatible API gateway. Requests may be
forwarded to local agents, proxied to external providers such as OpenAI, or
resolved using the built-in SQLite model registry.

## Development

Start the router using `make dev` and access `http://localhost:8000/v1/chat/completions`.

Before running any `make` command, activate the local virtual environment:

```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
```

For local models, run the Local Agent service:

```bash
uvicorn local_agent.main:app --port 5000
# or
python -m local_agent.main
```

See [docs/local_agent.md](docs/local_agent.md) for configuration options and environment variables.

Any request whose `model` starts with `local` will be forwarded to this agent.

### Docker

The development stack is defined in `docker-compose.yml` and now runs only the
router service. Caching happens in-process using a TTL dictionary, and the
SQLite model registry is stored in a named volume so data persists between runs.

Start the stack with:

```bash
make docker-dev
```

Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust the values if needed.
Key environment variables:

- `RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS` – maximum requests per client within the window
- `RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW` – window size in seconds for rate limiting
- `GROK_BASE_URL` – base URL for the Grok API
- `EXTERNAL_GROK_KEY` – API key for Grok

On macOS you may also run the Local Agent container by enabling the `darwin`
profile:

```bash
COMPOSE_PROFILES=darwin make docker-dev
```

Press `Ctrl+C` to stop the services; the `docker-dev` target will automatically
remove the containers. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust the values if
needed.


### k3s Cluster

To spin up a local k3s cluster with the sample llm-d chart run:

```bash
make k3s-up
```

After the chart deploys, set `LLMD_ENDPOINT` to the service URL so the router
can forward requests.

Run the unit tests with:

```bash
make test
```

Integration tests require Docker and are skipped by default. Execute them
explicitly with:

```bash
make test-integration
```

### Model Registry

Create the SQLite registry and seed default entries:

```bash
make migrate
make seed
```

Add or update a single model entry:

```bash
python -m router.cli add-model <name> <type> <endpoint> [kind]
```

Register a Hugging Face model that uses local weights:

```bash
python -m router.cli add-model meta-llama/Llama-3 huggingface https://huggingface.co weight
```

Fetch the latest models from OpenAI and refresh the registry:

```bash
python -m router.cli refresh-openai
```

## Documentation

This project uses [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) with the
[Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) theme.
Key pages include `setup.md`, `usage.md` and `api_examples.md` under `docs/`.
Start a live preview with:

```bash
make docs-serve
```

CI builds the site using `mkdocs build` and a dedicated workflow deploys the
generated `site/` directory to GitHub Pages.
